# Combat

## Introduction

Combat is dangerous, and wise adventurers seek to avoid it.

## Initiative

When combat breaks out, a turn order must be established for the combatants.

### Declaring Actions

At the beginning of a round, the GM describes the actions likely taken by your opponents. You then declare your character’s intentions for the round before rolling any dice. 

### Determining Fast and Slow Turns

Next, all combatants determine whether their declared intentions involve a *fast* or *slow* turn.

A **fast** turn consists of taking only a **single action**, such as:

- Using a relic
- Casting a spell
- Making an attack
- Moving to an adjacent zone
- Disengaging from an opponent 
- Trying a gambit against a close opponent

A **slow** turn consists of both **moving and taking an action**, or actions that take more time, such as:

- Moving twice
- Aiming a ranged weapon
- Forming up a shield wall
- Reviving an incapacitated ally
- Moving before making an attack
- Concentrating on maintaining an ongoing spell
- Retrieving a weapon from a backpack, then attacking

### Setting Turn Order and Resolving Actions

After determining who’s turns will be fast or slow, the order of resolving actions is as follows:

1. Resolve all fast turns before slow turns.
2. If players and opponents both take a fast turn, the player must make a DEX *or* WIL check to go first.
3. If players and opponents both take a slow turn, the player must make a DEX *or* WIL check to go first.

## Actions

On your turn in a combat round, your character can move to an adjacent zone and take an action. Actions can range from attacking, moving again, tripping or disarming an opponent, negotiating, or anything else within reason.

## Attacks

**Attacks always hit**. Roll your weapon’s damage dice and do that much damage to an opponent minus their armor rating. Remember, this is also true for your opponents; their attacks always hit you.

### Bonus Damage

In some situations, attacks may receive an extra die, noted as +d6, +d8, etc. Roll the extra die with your weapon’s damage roll, keeping the **best** result. For example, wielding a sword with both hands adds +d8 bonus damage. 

### Impaired Attacks

When an attack is **impaired**, such as firing at an opponent behind cover or fighting while your hands are bound, roll **+d4** damage and keep the **worst** result.

### Critical Hits

Rolling the **maximum damage** on a weapon’s die roll is a **critical hit**. A critical hit **ignores** the target’s armor rating and deals the total damage.

### Dual-Wielding

If attacking with two weapons, one in your main hand and one offhand, the offhand weapon functions as a bonus damage die. Roll damage for both and choose the best result.

### Multiple Attackers 

If multiple combatants attack the same target, all attackers roll their damage but keep only the best result. 

### Ranged Attacks

Ranged weapons can’t be used if you’re in the same zone as your target.

### Aiming

Not moving and using an action to aim instead of attacking allows a character to ignore the target’s armor with a ranged weapon the next round.

### Blast

Attacks with the *blast* quality affect all targets in the zone, rolling damage separately for each affected combatant. Blast refers to anything from fireballs, massive sweeping onslaughts, and swarms of tiny creatures. If unsure how many targets can be affected in the zone, roll the weapon’s damage die for the number of targets affected.

### Subdual

Rather than inflicting grievous harm, you can attempt to **subdue** an opponent using a melee weapon. Ranged weapons can’t subdue. Declare that you’re trying to subdue and then attack as usual but halve the damage. An opponent who would suffer critical damage or death from a subdual attack is instead knocked unconscious.

### Gambits

Gambits are combat maneuvers such as stunning, shoving, disarming, tripping, or sundering armor. They’re resolved with an attribute check. Gambits can’t cause damage directly but may do so indirectly (for example, pushing an enemy off a ledge). 

## Advantage in Combat

Characters can gain an advantage in combat by attacking a target who’s on lower ground, off balance, disarmed, distracted, or tactically disadvantaged in any significant way. 

When a character has an advantage against an opponent, they can apply advantage to either their damage roll or a gambit attempt against that opponent. Alternatively, you can make both an attack and a gambit attempt against that opponent without an advantage in the same round.

If you apply the advantage to your damage roll, roll only your weapon’s damage die twice, taking the best result. If you have any bonus damage dice, such as a +d12 for attacking an unaware opponent, bonus dice are not rolled twice. Bonus damage dice rolls are only ever rolled once and not modified by advantage.

## Morale

When you’re fighting a group of opponents, the opponents must pass a WIL check as a group to continue fighting after they take their first casualty and again after they lose half their numbers or their leader is defeated.

Lone foes must pass a WIL check when reduced to 0 HP.

!!! note

		Morale checks don’t apply to players. You have to decide when it’s prudent to run away!

## Disengaging

If you want to retreat to an adjacent zone while an enemy occupies your zone, you must first make a successful STR *or* DEX check to disengage from the fight. If you fail, the enemy makes a free attack against you as you retreat from the zone.
